.TH "GOTO VM"  "1" "Jun 2012" "Goto virtual machine" HSR
.SH NAME
tmc \- turing machine compiler for gvm
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tmc
[
.B \-dnt
] [
.BI -0 initial-value0
] [
.BI -s sleep
] programfile
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR tmc (1)
takes a turing machine description an turns it into an equivalent
GOTO program that can then be executed by the GOTO virtual machine
.BR tvm (1).

A Turing machine program that
.BR tmc (1) 
can understand is a list of statements of the form

.ti 10
( 
.I state
,
.I tapecontents
) -> (
.I newstate
,
.I newtapecontents
)
.I movement

This entry specifies that if the machine is in state
.I state
and reads the character
.I tapecontents
from the current position of the read/write-head, it will
transition to new state
.IR newstate ,
write 
.I newtapeconents
to the current cell and move
the read/write-head according to the value of
.IR movement .
This list thus describes the transition function of the turing machine.
Note that only the characters 0, 1 and B (for blank) are allowed to
encode the 
.I tapecontents
and
.IR newtapecontents .

The 
.I movement
element can be Left, Right or Halt.
So there is no particular accepting or rejecting state as in some other
definitions of the turing machine.

This implementation uses the first three variables to represent the
state of the turing machine. v0 contains an encoded version of the
contents of the tape. For this purpose, blank is encoded as 0,
0 is encoded as 1 and 1 is encoded as 2. The string that results
from this encoding is the interpreted as a number in base 4 and
stored in v0. Base 4 is used because cells of the tape are then
2-bit blocks of the binary representation of v0.

Variable v1 contains the current state and v2 contains the current
read/write-head position. 

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-d
enable debug output.
.TP
.BI \-o outfile
Specifies that the generated GOTO program be written to the file
.I outfile
instead of the default a.goto.
.TP
.B \-n
don't actually execute the program, just read it. This is useful when
looking for syntactic problems in the code.
.TP
.BI \-s state
Set the initial state to 
.IR state .
By default, the initial state is 0.
.TP
.BI \-p position
Set the initial position to
.IR position .
By default, the initial position is 0. The turing machine
implementation is to a tape that is inifinite only to the right,
some applications may still want to use portions of the tape to the
left of the initial position. By adjusting the initial position using
this option, this limited turing machine can still be used.
.TP
.BI \-t tapecontents
use the string 
.I tapecontents
as the initial contents of the tape. Note that the string may not
contain any other characters than 0, 1 and blank.
.TP
.BI \-T tapefilename
Read the initial contents from a file named
.IR tapefilename .
The file
.I tapefilename
may only contain a single line.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR gvm(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Prof. Dr. Andreas Mueller <andreas.mueller@hsr.ch>
